Script for L4 - Mechanisms - Cell Behaviors(*animation)Slide 1Now that you know the general organization of a plant cell, I will describe several aspects of the cell behaviors that are the general mechanisms that account for plant growth, development and responding to external information. *In the next lecture I will describe the general mechanisms that direct cell behaviors.  Throughout the course there will be many specific details of cell behaviors being directed by specific proteins.  I think the general concepts covered in the next two lectures help me from getting lost in all the details; helps me see the big picture of what plants are and how they do what they do.  Of course the details do matter - the difference between a plant being infected by a microbe or not being infected can be as little as a one nucleotide difference.Maybe by the end of the course you will have a sense of how a tiny, difference in genetic information can account for a visible difference such as disease or no disease, which in turn, if you think about human network connections of global proportions, can result in increased food costs, or in some parts of the world, the difference between living or death by starvation. Slide 2The building of a plant organ begins at apical meristems, either a shoot apical meristem located at the tip of a stem, or a root apical meristem at the tip of a root.In the apical meristem are cells that are undifferentiated, which means the cells have the potential to reorganize in to different types of cells.  These cells are called stem cells and are also called initials. Note that stem cells can be located in any plant organ not just at the tip of a stem.  The word "stem" in the case of stem cell refers to their undifferentiated state.  You may be familiar with the importance of stem cells in the context of human development and health.The region of an apical meristem where the stem cells are located is called the promeristem.When a stem cell divides, one daughter stays in the promeristem, and the other daughter is displaced out of the promeristem and into a primary meristem*.   There are three primary meristems: the protoderm, which is the surface layer, the ground meristem, which consists of most of the internal cell layers, and the procambium, which consists of cell layers embedded in the ground meristem.Cells in the primary meristems divide rapidly, meaning much more frequently than the cells in the promeristem.  Cells in the primary meristems also begin to differentiate, which means the cells begin to reorganize towards becoming specific cell types.What cell type a given cell becomes depends on its position in the meristem.  There are several different hormones that are distributed throughout the meristem in patterns that result in position specific mixes and amounts of hormones.  The cells respond to these position specific signals.*Cells displaced out of the primary meristems then expand and complete differentiation to mature cell types of three tissue systems: dermal tissues, ground tissues and vascular tissues.Slide 3In general, there is more cell division happening in the apical meristem then among cells displaced out of the meristem. The cells in the promeristem, the stem cells, are an exception in that they divide less frequently and several cells in the promeristem may divide only rarely, and are called quiescent cells.Outside of the apical meristem*, there are dividing cells where tissue is damaged, and also in what are called cambiums that account for secondary growth.In contrast to cell division, cells in the promeristem remain undifferentiated, but cells being displaced through the primary meristems and out of the meristems are undergoing cell differentiation.  Cells that are dividing also have to grow*.  The cells need energy and raw materials to build cell parts, like cell walls, membranes and organelles, before dividing in half.  The cells in the apical meristems typically are building cellular parts at a higher rate than cells displaced out of the meristem.  Even when cells mature*, there still is a need for energy and metabolism to maintain cell structure because cell parts do get damaged and then need to be replaced.*Cells in the meristem and outside of the meristem are constantly talking to each other, sending signals by synthesizing hormones, and responding to hormones synthesized by other cells.*Similarly, cells throughout the plant body are making secretions to build, maintain, repair or alter their cell walls and also their plasma membranes. The majority of increase in a plant organ's size is actually not due to cell divisions directly, but accounted for by *cells expanding.  Of course cell divisions in the meristem are needed to provide a steady flow of new cells that can then expand*Cell death also happens after cells are displaced out of the meristem.  Several cell types kill themselves at maturity.*The development of lateral organs, such as leaves or floral organs, also involves position specific cell behaviors: regions where cells are growing and dividing, other regions where cells are expanding and other regions where cells are completing differentiation into mature cell types.  The position specific cell behaviors arise from the underlying distribution of hormones.  In the rest of the lecture I will describe some aspects of each cell behavior.Slide 4Cells in meristems progress through what is called the cell cycle - first growing, then copying the genetic information, then segregating components to opposite sides, and then dividing in half to make two cells from one cell.Many different proteins direct the flow of events that are the cell cycle - the Cyclin and CDK proteins are important examples.*During the G1 phase, the cell grows, using its metabolic networks, and integrates information coming from numerous hormones.  If the information tells the cell to divide, then the cell turns on the expression of genes coding for proteins needed for the next phase called S phase*.  During S phase, protein machines copy the genetic information, so at the end of S phase the cell has four genome copies instead of two.The cell then prepares for mitosis during the G2 phase.During mitosis, the chromosomes are segregated, pushed and pulled along the microtubules of the mitotic spindle, so each daughter receives 2 genome copies, and then a wall is built between the two daughters, a process called cytokinesis.*Longitudinal cross section through the tip of an onion root, and stained with a dye that sticks to DNA, shows several cells that have their chromosomes condensed and are at different stages of mitosis.  One of the most obvious stages is called anaphase*, which is when the chromosomes are being moved along the microtubules to opposite sides of the cell. Slide 5Cell growth involves many different proteins, called enzymes, which direct the flow of energy and materials.  The metabolic map here shows numerous networks of interconnected metabolic pathways.  It probably looks overwhelming to comprehend, but there are some basics that I hope give you a sense of the flow of materials and energy in a cell.  *Each black dot, or node, represents a small organic molecule, a specific arrangement of atoms, with each atom held to another atom by a covalent bond, the sharing of electrons between two atoms.*Each line represents an enzyme that selectively binds the connected small organic molecule, and catalyzes the breaking and/or forming of a covalent bond so that a chemical rearrangement happens.  The substrate molecule is changed into a product molecule.  The product is then a substrate for the next enzyme in a chain, or pathway, of chemical reactions.Although the metabolic map may look complex, there is a core pathway* that consists of a chain of chemical reactions called glycolysis, which is connected to a chain of chemical reactions called oxidative respiration.  The core pathway converts the energy in glucose to energy in ATP, which can then be used by many different proteins to do work.  However, instead of completely oxidizing glucose to carbon dioxide, many of the intermediate molecules in the pathway can serve as starting material for synthesizing the building blocks for the main cellular structures: *sugars for synthesizing polysaccharides such as cellulose, *amino acids for synthesizing proteins, *fatty acids for synthesizing lipids for building membranes, and *nitrogenous bases for synthesizing nucleic acids: RNA copies of genes for expression, and copying the genetic information during S-phase of the cell cycle.Also note that *the output of photosynthesis is a molecule, glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate, that is an intermediate of the core pathway.*Hormones and secondary metabolites are also not far removed from the core pathway.When I look at the metabolic map I think of resource allocation.  A cell has a constant flow of input materials that it distributes, through chemical transformations, to making all its different parts, and also, in a sense, burning some of the materials to generate the energy needed to do cellular work.  Depending on external information, a cell can allocate its resources to meet different needs.Slide 6Cell signaling also involves many different proteins.  Cell signaling is important for coordinating cell behaviors and also for adjusting cell behaviors in response to external information, like changes in temperature, light quality or the presence of pathogens or herbivores.Cell signaling starts with a protein receptor that is selective for a given input signal, such as a hormone.  An input signal can be thought of as information.  Binding of the input causes the receptor to change shape and *send a signal into the cell.  The receptor couples and connects the presence of the input to a change inside the cell.The input is then relayed through a chain of events, called signal transduction*, that involves numerous proteins, but also small molecules such as Ca2+.The chain ends by turning on proteins that in general are called effectors.*  The effectors initiate the response.  Effectors are often proteins that *select some genes to be expressed*, to be turned on, and select other genes to be turned off, to NOT be expressed.The result is a change in the set of proteins present in the cell, and because proteins direct cell behaviors, such as the enzymes that direct the flow of energy and materials, the behavior of the cell is adjusted in response to the hormone.  Signaling can be thought of as information flow.  The proteins involved direct the input information to an appropriate response.Slide 7Cell secretions involve many different proteins.  Proteins are involved in the forming of vesicles, the transport of vesicles and the fusing of vesicles with the correct target membrane.  There are also many enzymatic proteins inside the lumen of the endoplasmic reticulum and golgi body.  The enzymes catalyze synthesis of *polysaccharides, phenols and fatty substances like cutin, which are all secreted out of the cell to build the cell wall.  Proteins are also secreted into the cell wall.  Expansins are an example of cell wall proteins.  Expansins function in the process of cell expansion.The secretion system, which we discussed in a previous lecture on cell organization, also brings lipids, and embedded proteins, to the plasma membrane*.  When vesicles fuse with the membrane, the vesicle membrane is added to the plasma membrane.  Vesicles also form at the plasma membrane and so remove lipid and proteins from the plasma membrane.  There is a constant turnover of the plasma membrane - lipids and proteins added to the membrane, and lipids and proteins removed from the membrane.Slide 8Cell expansions account for the majority of increase in the size of a plant organ, such as an elongating root, stem, leaf or floral organ.  The direction cells expand also contributes to the form of an organ.Cells expand when water flows into the cytosol and then into the vacuole.  The direction that water flows, into or out of a cell,  depends on where the ions are most concentrated: inside the vacuole or outside in the apoplast.  Proteins in the plasma membrane, and the tonoplast, the membrane surrounding the vacuole, control the flow of ions in and out of a cell, and so in turn, control what direction water will flow.*When water flows into a cell, the cell wall resists the increase in cell volume, which results in an outward force called turgor pressure. The cell then expands in the direction of least resistance*.  If the cellulose fibers are in all directions, then the cell expands in all directions forming a spherical cell.  If the cellulose fibers are all in the same direction, then the cell expands in the direction perpendicular to the direction of the cellulose fibers.When cellulose fibers are being synthesized at the plasma membrane, there are proteins that regulate the direction in which the fibers are synthesized.Slide 9When you look at a cross section of a root or stem or leaf or floral organ, you see that the organ is not made up of only one cell type, but there are a variety of cells differing in shape, size and thickness of their cell walls.  Although all the cells of a body share the same genetic information, the cells can change what parts of the information are used, and hence change their organization so it is different from other cells.  The process of using certain parts of the genetic information to achieve a particular cellular organization is called differentiation.Genetic information is encoded in double stranded DNA fibers.  The long DNA fibers are wrapped around proteins at regular intervals to form a unit called a nucleosome.  The nucleosomes can be packed close together so that those portions of the DNA fiber are not accessible*, or the nucleosomes can be loose, not packed together, in which case those portions of DNA are accessible and can be selected to be used as templates* for making RNA copies, hence expressing selected genes.The packing together of nucleosomes can be altered by incoming signals, which are telling the cell to differentiate.  The incoming signals *chemically modify the histones so that nucleosomes packed close together are then loosened, and other modifications cause loose nucleosomes to then be packed together.  The result is a change in which portions, and hence genes, of a DNA fiber are accessible for being used.  The change in DNA accessibility results in a cell reorganizing itself to perform specific tasks and mature into a specific cell type.Interestingly, *when a cell receives a signal, and alters the packing of nucleosomes, the modification is stable even if the cell divides several times.  The resulting daughters retain the original cell's identity, even if the signal is no longer present.  The stable change in which portions of DNA are accessible is called epigenetics.The accessibility or inaccessibility of portions of DNA are referred to as chromatin states.Slide 10Here are a few examples of different cell types that can all be derived from a meristematic cell, but differ from each other in cell shape, size, wall thickness, subcellular organization and also behaviors.  Slide 11The last main cell behavior we discuss is cell death.  The example here is for the maturation of vessel elements in the xylem.  The vessel elements are dead at maturity, and even though dead, function to conduct materials from the root up to the shoot.Cell death is controlled by proteins and so is called programmed cell death.  The cells kill themselves in response to signals.  Before initiating death, the cell expresses a variety of proteins that are digestive enzymes.  The proteins are synthesized at the endoplasmic reticulum and delivered to the vacuole by way of vesicle transport*.  When the cell receives the death signal, a signal transduction pathway ends with the rupture of the tonoplast*, the membrane surrounding the vacuole.  The digestive enzymes are then released into the cytosol.  The enzymes catalyze the breakdown of most cellular proteins, lipids and nucleic acids.  *At the end of the process, the vessel element lacks a protoplast and all that remains is the cell wall.Slide 12Hopefully you now have the general idea of how a plant grows, develops and responds to external information.  The plant's cells grow, divide, make secretions, expand, differentiate and die.  But how are the cell behaviors directed?  The general answer is that proteins direct cell behaviors.  The next lecture describes in general what proteins are and the three basic, mechanistic things proteins do.