Script for L3 - Organization of Plant Cells
(*animation)

Slide 1
Cells are the fundamental structural and functional units that make up a plant body, and adjust the behavior of the plant in response to external information.  A plant body consists of many different cell types, however, most plant cells do have a fundamental organization that includes numerous compartments called organelles, which are separated from each other by selectively permeable membranes.

The outermost structure of a plant cell is the cell wall.  The volume of space occupied by the cell wall is called the apoplast.  We will discuss the structure and functions of the cell wall in a later lecture.

In this lecture we will take a brief tour of the general structure and functions of the cell compartments.

Slide 2
Plant cells are eukaryotic cells.  Bacteria cells are prokaryotic, are typically smaller than eukaryotic cells, and lack internal compartments.  A eukaryotic cell, in contrast, separates a variety of chemical processes and activities of diverse proteins into many compartments, each with a selectively permeable membrane.  

There are three main categories of organelles.

*The endomembrane system includes the endoplasmic reticulum*, the nuclear envelope, the golgi body*, the vacuole, and the plasma membrane, which is adjacent to the cell wall.   Endosomes are also part of the endomembrane system, but we won't discuss endosomes in this lecture. 

*Oil bodies, and peroxisomes and glyoxysomes (which are not shown here) are derived from the endomembrane system but after being derived can propagate independently.  We won't discuss these three organelles in this lecture.

*The mitochondria and the plastids are independently dividing, semi-autonomous organelles, which also contain some genetic information.  Most of the proteins functioning in mitochondria or plastids are coded for in the genetic information in the nucleus.

Slide 3
Essential to the organization of a cell are its membranes - the plasma membrane and the membranes of each organelle.  Membranes are a bilayer, two layers of phospholipids oriented in opposite directions so that in the middle are only fatty acids that are hydrophobic.  

The fatty acids consist of only carbon and hydrogen, *which share the electrons of covalent bonds equally, so there is no excess negative or positive charge.  
In contrast, water, and many other molecules, including the hydrophilic head group of phospholipids, have oxygen and nitrogen*, which do not share electrons equally resulting in excess negative and positive charges.

Molecules with no excess charge do not form attractions with molecules that have excess charge, such as fatty acids that do not form attractions with water molecules.

*This results in the lipid component of a membrane functioning as a barrier to the flow of charged molecules, such as potassium, sodium, calcium and protons, and metabolites such as organic acids and sugars.

Slide 4
Cell membranes provide a barrier that separates the outside of the cell from the inside, or separate the cytosol from the inside of an organelle.  However, there are proteins that are embedded in the bilayer and are called integral proteins.  Integral proteins include proteins that form ion channels, and proteins that bind specific organic molecules and transport them across the membrane.

The integral proteins are mechanisms that select what is moved in and out of the cell, or in and out of an organelle.  The proteins direct the flow of materials in or out of a compartment. The structure of a membrane, the lipids and embedded proteins, has the function of being a selectively permeable barrier. 

*Other integral proteins are receptors, which bind specific molecules, such as a hormone, and send a signal into the cell to direct the cell’s behavior.

Other proteins associate with only one of the two layers and are called peripheral proteins.  Some peripheral proteins bind to and organize the cytoskeleton, a dynamic network of protein filaments that help position and move the organelles.

Peripheral proteins associated with the outer layer are often glycosylated*, meaning a chain of sugars, called a carbohydrate or polysaccharide, are covalently bonded to the protein.

The membrane surface also has a variety of chemical groups that are covalently bonded to the phosphate of the lipid's hydrophillic head group.

Slide 5
The membranes of the different organelles vary in the particular proteins associated with the membrane and also in the chemical nature of the fatty acids.  

Fatty acids can vary in length or the degree of saturation.  A saturated fatty acid has no double bonds like myristic and palmitic acid.  An unsaturated fatty acid has double bonds like farnesyl or geranylgeranyl acid. 

Note that these fatty acids are not phospholipids, but are covalently bonded to a protein and function to anchor the peripheral proteins at the membrane surface. 

These fatty acids are also found as part of phospholipids.

Fatty acids that are saturated tend to decrease the fluidity of the membrane, while unsaturated fatty acids tend to increase the fluidity.  In general, membranes are fluid with the component parts, the lipids and proteins, moving around.

In addition to having different fatty acids, phospholipids can also vary in the chemical nature of the head groups*.

Plastids have another membrane variation* - the plastid lipids are NOT phospholipids but glycolipids.  Galactose is a sugar.  Note that galactose is covalently bonded directly to glycerol and there is no phosphate.

One final note about the organization of membranes is that the outer and inner surfaces of a membrane typically have different head groups and different peripheral proteins, so the two surfaces are structurally different and have different functions.

Slide 6
You may have noticed that in the last two slides we began talking about there being lots of different proteins associated with membranes.  Proteins are found in membranes, and in every compartment of a cell, and even outside a cell in the cell wall.  

The set of proteins a particular cell makes, by the process of gene expression, determines a cell type's specific organization and how the cell behaves. 

Most of the genetic information is stored in the nucleus.  The nucleus is the volume of space enclosed by the nuclear envelope, which is continuous with the endoplasmic reticulum, and is part of the endomembrane system.

The double-stranded DNA fibers, one per chromosome, are wrapped around proteins called histones* that together form nucleosomes shown in red.  Protein and DNA together is collectively called chromatin.

DNA in chromatin that is condensed and tightly packed is inaccessible and cannot be expressed. 

DNA in chromatin that is not highly condensed can be opened and one strand used as a template to make a RNA copy of a stretch of DNA sequence called a gene; a stretch of DNA that codes for a protein.  The process of making a RNA copy is called transcription and is the first step of gene expression.  

Here are two other genes being expressed.  

The RNA copies, called messenger RNA, move out of the nucleus through pores.

In the cytoplasm, a RNA-protein machine called a ribosome binds the RNA and uses the RNA’s sequence of nucleotides to direct the synthesis of a chain of amino acids that fold to form the encoded protein.  This process is called translation and completes the process of gene expression.*

You might be wondering what selects genes to be expressed.  Proteins.  *Proteins are mechanisms that direct the flow of information, for example the presence of a hormone, to selecting which genes get expressed.

*You might have noticed a sphere inside the nucleus.  This is the nucleolus where ribosomes are synthesized.  

Slide 7
Here is a transmission electron micrograph of a nucleus. The dense regions are either highly condensed chromatin called heterochromatin or the nucleolus where ribosomes are synthesized.  

The less dense regions are where chromatin is less condensed and available for gene expression.  This accessible chromatin is called euchromatin.  

On the surface of the nucleus and embedded in the envelope are the nuclear pores, a multiprotein complex that regulates what goes in and out of the nucleus.  

Only proteins with a nuclear localization signal, a specific amino acid sequence, are moved into the nucleus, other proteins are excluded. 

*Different signal sequences target proteins to other organelles. 

Regulating what proteins are present inside a given organelle, or in the organelle's membrane, controls what happens inside the organelle.


Slide 8
Proteins are synthesized by ribosomes binding RNA and using the RNA sequence to direct the synthesis of a specific protein.  Although the two main subunits of ribosomes are synthesized inside the nucleus, ribosomes are moved to and accumulate in the cytosol.  

This electron micrograph lets us see ribosomes inside a cell. Each dot is a fully assembled ribosome.

Proteins without a signal sequence remain in the cytosol and carry out their function in the cytosol.  

*Some proteins have signal sequences that direct the protein to the plastids or the mitochondria or the nucleus.

Proteins that carry out their function inside the enodmembrane system or are secreted out of the cell, *have a signal sequence that causes the protein and the ribosome, while synthesis is still in progress, to associate with the endoplasmic reticulum.

As protein synthesis continues, the protein is inserted into the lumen of the ER or into the membrane of the ER.

*ER with associated ribosomes appears rough in electron micrographs, and ER without appears smooth.

A protein inside the ER lumen, or integral to its membrane, diffuses until loaded into a vesicle that is transported to, and fuses with the golgi body. 

Note that to move from sac to sac within the golgi body, a protein does have to be loaded into a vesicle each time.

The protein is then loaded into a vesicle and transported to the plasma membrane, where the protein is secreted out of the cell, or the vesicle could deliver the protein to the vacuole.

Note that the ER membrane is also moved as part of a vesicle and then added to the golgi body.  Just like a protein, the membrane moves through the golgi body and eventually is delivered to either the plasma membrane or the tonoplast, the membrane of the vacuole.

Proteins that are integrated into the membrane are also transported from the ER to the plasma membrane.  This is how ion channels, receptors, transporters and other integral membrane proteins end up in the plasma membrane or other endomembranes.

Some proteins remain and function inside the ER.  Other proteins remain and function inside the golgi body.

Slide 9
The endoplasmic reticulum is an extensive network, extending from the nuclear envelope to the space adjacent to the plasma membrane, called the cell cortex.

The network is dynamic with parts of the ER changing between a tubule structure and a flattened sac structure called cisterna.

As described in the previous slide, proteins that are to be secreted are synthesized into the ER lumen, or into the membrane as integral proteins.  In addition to functioning in secretion and protein sorting, the ER is where lipids are synthesized.

The protein enzymes that synthesize lipids are located on the cytosolic surface of the ER membrane.  Enzymes in the cytosol also modify the head groups.  This results in asymmetry, with the cytosol surface of the bilayer having different modifications then the lumen side, which ultimately will face the outside of the cell.  

Slide 10
The Golgi body consists of a stack of sacs. A sac is called a cisternae.  Each sac is separate from the other sacs.  Lipids and proteins can only move between sacs by vesicle transport. 

The discontinuity of cisternae allows a different set of protein enzymes to be located in each sac.  The enzymes in each sac can sequentially modify proteins as they move through each sac.  

Enzymes in the golgi sacs add sugar groups onto proteins, so proteins secreted out of cells are typically glycoproteins - proteins with chains of sugars attached. Proteins located inside the vacuole are also glycoproteins.

Enzymes in the golgi sacs also synthesize polysaccharides, such as pectins and hemicelluloses, that are important structural components of the cell wall.

There is a lot of vesicle traffic in a cell.  Vesicles moving from the ER to the golgi.  Vesicles moving from sac to sac within the golgi.  Vesicles moving from the golgi to the plasma membrane.  Vesicles moving from the golgi to the vacuole.  And vesicles moving in the opposite directions - plasma membrane to golgi to ER, or plasma membrane to vacuole.  

How do vesicles load the right proteins, and deliver the proteins to the correct compartment?  The general answer is that there are a variety of other proteins whose functions, by way of selective binding, catalysis and coupling, are to direct the flow of vesicle traffic. 

Slide 11
In mature cells, most of the cell volume is inside the vacuole.  Vacuoles have a diversity of functions.  One major function is the turn over of cellular components, such as degrading proteins into amino acid subunits that can be recycled.  

What degrades the proteins?  Proteins called proteases, which are located inside the vacuole, delivered there by vesicles, catalyze the breaking of the covalent bond between amino acids.

*When cells are maturing and expanding, net water flow is from the apoplast to the vacuole.  The increase in water causes the cell to expand.  Cell expansion is partly resisted by the cell wall, which causes an increase in water pressure inside the cell called turgor pressure.  A balance between the outward force of turgor pressure and resistance by the cell wall regulates the rate, extent and direction of cell expansion.
As you might imagine at this point, proteins ultimately direct cell wall resistance and the flow of water.

*Many different molecules are stored in the vacuole, including pigments in the cells of flower petals, secondary metabolites that deter herbivores from eating the plant, and in seeds, vacuoles serve to store proteins.

Slide 12
There are two more organelles to discuss - mitochondria and plastids.  Both are essential to how a cell converts energy between forms: energy in the form of solar radiation, energy in the chemical bonds of sugars or organic acids and energy in the terminal phosphate of ATP - adenosine triphosphate.  The energy conversion is not direct, but involves coupling the flow of electrons to generating a proton gradient, which is then coupled to the synthesis of ATP.  We will cover the details in a later lecture.

ATP is said to be a universal energy carrier within cells.  *Many proteins in a cell couple the release of energy in ATP to doing some type of cellular work.  Many proteins are little machines. 

*Mitochondria have some genetic information that encodes for several of the key proteins involved in converting energy in C-C and C-H covalent bonds into the energy of ATP.  The DNA also codes for proteins necessary for copying the mitochondrial DNA and gene expression inside mitochondria.  Most of the proteins located in mitochondria, however, are coded for in the DNA in the nucleus.

Mitochondria have two bilayers; an outer membrane and an inner membrane.  The innermembrane is highly folded.  The folds are called cristae.

Inward of the inner membrane is the mitochondrial matrix.  The proteins that release energy from the covalent bonds, a process called the Citric acid cycle, are located in the matrix.  The many proteins involved in coupling electron transport to generating a proton gradient and synthesizing ATP, a process called oxidative respiration, are embedded in the inner membrane.  We will return to the details in a later lecture.


Slide 13
The other energy-converting organelle is the chloroplast, which is a mature plastid found in green tissues doing photosynthesis.

Proplastids are present in the undifferentiated cells of meristems.  Meristems are located at the tip of stems and at the tip of roots, and are a region where cells are dividing rapidly - cells are making more cells.  Cells pushed out of the meristem receive position specific signals that signal cells to differentiate into different cell types.  

*During differentiation, proplastids mature into different type of plastids.

Amlyoplasts, also called leucoplasts, are organized for storing much starch, while in other cells there are pigment-containing chromoplasts.

Etioplasts are immature chloroplasts.  After exposure to light, internal membranes organize into the structures necessary for photosynthesis, resulting in chloroplasts.

Plastids, like mitochondria, have an outer and inner membrane, and also have some genetic information* located in the stroma.

Unlike mitochondria, plastids have an internal membrane system called thylakoids.

In chloroplasts, the many proteins that direct the flow of the light reactions are embedded in the thylakoid membranes.  The many proteins that direct the flow of carbon dioxide into sugars are located in the stroma.  Photosynthesis consists of the light reactions and the conversion of carbon dioxide into sugar.

Slide 14
In addition to the organelles, another important aspect of a cell's organization is its cytoskeleton, which is located in the cytosol.

The space outside of the organelles is called the cytosol.  In many mature cells the cytosol occupies only a small volume of the cell - most of the cell volume is occupied by the vacuole.

The cytosol is crowded with water, many different proteins, small organic molecules and inorganic molecules, and dynamic protein filaments that often grow and shrink.  The network of filaments is called the cytoskeleton.  

There are two types of filaments.  Microtubules consist of 13 chains of dimers.  Each dimer has the proteins ?-tubulin and ?-tubulin.  A microtubule is hollow in the middle.  

Actin filaments are two chains wrapped together. Each chain is assembled from actin monomers.  Actin is another type of protein.

These filaments can lose units and shrink, or add units and grow.  

Motor proteins bind to both filaments and cargo, such as vesicles or organelles.  Motor proteins couple the energy in ATP, or GTP, to doing the work of moving an organelle or a vesicle in one direction.

For example, when a cell divides into two cells, an array of microtubules, called the phragmoplast, forms and transports vesicles to the space between the two nuclei.  The vesicles fuse and release their contents to form a new cell wall between the two cells.   

Prior to forming the phragmoplast, microtubules also form a mitotic spindle on which chromosomes are pulled to opposite sides of the cell, so that each new cell gets a copy of the genetic information.

Slide 15
Here is a summary of the main points from this lecture.

In the lectures to follow, we will discuss a variety of cellular processes that happen in different cellular compartments.  I think for this course it is wise to know your way around a cell's organization.  It is likely worth your time to draw, on a single piece of paper, a cell with its main parts we discussed today, and label each structure and make a list of the processes happening at the different locations in a cell.  The list of functions for each part also serves to state the function of the part.

 



